# The Impact of Therapeutic Inertia on Long-term Blood Pressure Control

This repository contains the code associated with our [research
paper](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33641362/).

Motivation
==========

**Therapeutic inertia** has been defined as the failure of health-care
providers to act appropriately during clinical visits (e.g. by
initiating or intensifying treatment therapy) when therapeutic goals are
not reached \[[Phillips et al.,
2001](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11694107/)\]. It has been reported
that hypertensive individuals experience therapeutic inertia in up to
85% of visits in some European countries \[[Wang et al.,
2007](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17242314/)\]. As such, therapeutic
inertia is a major obstacle to reaching individual and public-health
targets \[[Okonofua et al.,
2006](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16432045/)\].

This study assesses the impact of therapeutic inertia on long-term
systolic blood pressure (SBP) control and investigate how the inherent
variability of BP measurement affects treatment decisions. A Monte Carlo
framework is used to simulate repeated visits in which BP measurements
are made with random error, and subsequent treatment decisions are based
on probabilities conditioned on measurement values. Results show that
show that the impact of therapeutic inertia during treatment initiation
persists during long-term follow-up. Strategies to remove therapeutic
inertia during treatment initiation (ie, dual antihypertensive therapy)
are likely to improve long-term BP control irrespective of BP
measurement technique.

Software Implementation
=======================

All source code used to generate the results and figures in the paper
are in the `code` directory.

All results generated by the code are saved in `results`.

Getting the Code
----------------

You can get a copy of all the files in this repository by [downloading
the zip
archive](https://github.com/alexandry-augustin/impact_of_therapeutic_inertia/archive/master.zip).
Or by using the `git clone` command

    git clone git@github.com:alexandry-augustin/impact_of_therapeutic_inertia.git

Installing the Dependencies
---------------------------

The recommended way to manage the project dependencies is to set up a
[conda](https://conda.io/docs/user-guide/install/) virtual environments
to avoid conflicts with your existing system Python installation.

Run the following command to create a new environment (Python 3.8.5 and
above is required):

    conda create -n therapeutic-inertia [python=3.8.5]

Run the following command to enable the newly created environment for
your current session:

    conda activate therapeutic-inertia

Any subsequent commands will use dependencies installed in
`therapeutic-inertia` environment.

Run the following command to install all required dependencies in the
environment:

    conda install numpy scipy pandas seaborn scikit-learn

Reproducing the Results
-----------------------

Before running any code make sure to have installed all the dependencies
and that you have activated the `therapeutic-inertia` conda environment
(see Section above).

Run the following to produce all results and figures:

    cd ./code/
    python single_cycle_facetgrid.py
    python multiple_cycles_facetgrid.py

    cd ./code/
    python multiple_cycles_facetgrid.py

    cd ./illustrations/
    find ./ -name "*.py" -exec python {} \;

The figures and data files will be placed in `./code/results`.

License
=======

All source code is made available under the MIT license. You can freely
use and modify the code, without warranty, so long as you provide
attribution to the authors. See [LICENSE](./LICENSE) for the full
license text.
